RFC 1002: Optionality qualifier in properties and links (#12)
edgedb/rfcs: text/1002-optionality-qualifier.rst

most of the time. Those assumptions shouldn't bar the user from changing
their mind when the need arises.

A default value has far reaching consequences which we cover in this
document.

Implementation
==============

Since the discussion always applies to properties and links, we're referring
to them simply as *pointers* below.

Assume OPTIONAL qualifiers when no explicit qualifier is provided
-----------------------------------------------------------------

This is the currently implemented behavior as of EdgeDB v1.0 alpha 3.

An optional pointer is a form of incomplete data that allows the application
to flexibly decide how to proceed. If the data is there, fine. If it isn't,
the application can include user-level code to deal with that.

Moreover, multi properties and multi links make the case of an empty set
intuitively acceptable: since the cardinality allows for any number of
elements, a state with an empty set is not surprising.

Plenty of examples of existing databases and RPC systems assume optionality
by default. Protocol buffers removed support for required fields altogether
in version 3. JSON-based NoSQL databases like MongoDB assume optionality.

> HTML form fields are optional by default.

Reviewer: I'd add that relational databases assume optionality by default too.

their mind when the need arises.

A default value has far reaching consequences which we cover in this
document.

Implementation
==============

Since the discussion always applies to properties and links, we're referring
to them simply as *pointers* below.

Assume OPTIONAL qualifiers when no explicit qualifier is provided
-----------------------------------------------------------------

This is the currently implemented behavior as of EdgeDB v1.0 alpha 3.

An optional pointer is a form of incomplete data that allows the application
to flexibly decide how to proceed. If the data is there, fine. If it isn't,
the application can include user-level code to deal with that.

Moreover, multi properties and multi links make the case of an empty set
intuitively acceptable: since the cardinality allows for any number of
elements, a state with an empty set is not surprising.

Plenty of examples of existing databases and RPC systems assume optionality
by default. Relational databases assume optionality unless a NOT NULL
constraint is passed. Protocol buffers removed support for required fields
altogether in version 3. JSON-based NoSQL databases like MongoDB assume

> optionality. HTML form fields are optional by default.

Reviewer: I'd also drop the nod to HTML forms -- pretty much no one uses them as is in modern apps. Don't get me wrong, the argument is still valid, it just feels a bit out of context.

provide values at INSERT time before will continue working and there are no
incompatible empty sets in the database prior to the migration.  However,
see "Downsides" below.

Downsides
~~~~~~~~~

The main disadvantage at time of writing is that the current behavior as of
EdgeDB v1.0a3 is the opposite: pointers without an explicit qualifier are
assumed optional. This poses a `Migration challenge`_.

Required pointers have to be always specified at INSERT time, making
queries more verbose to write and data more costly to send over the wire.
This can be dealt with by providing default values with SET DEFAULT which
is a form of optionality with an explicit fallback value which doesn't fall
outside of the declared type.

Required pointers by default make it more likely that users would have to
make required-to-optional pointer migrations in the future.  Those hide
a specific gotcha: pre-existing queries that were previously guaranteed
never to encounter empty sets now will.  Most of the time this will be
harmless but some queries that are analytical in nature will now fail to
return objects with empty pointers, which might lead to bugs in user code.

> Thrift documentation explains that "required is forever". What they mean

Reviewer: Maybe move this entire paragraph into the "A database is not a peer-to-peer RPC platform" section?

by this is that required fields have to be provided by the caller, say a
mobile device. Changing a required field into an optional field requires

> for the database to be updated first before any application code can use

Reviewer: I'd change the "database" to something related to RPC -- that would make it easier to parse this paragraph. We first discuss the problematic migration for RPCs and then try to draw a parallel with databases.

```suggestion
for the RPC backend to be updated first before any application code can use
```
